The Law of Total Probability is a fundamental rule in probability theory that relates marginal probabilities to conditional probabilities. It expresses the total probability of an outcome that can be realized via several distinct events.

## Statement

The law of total probability states that if {Bn:n=1,2,3,…} is a finite or countably infinite partition of a sample space (a set of pairwise disjoint events whose union is the entire sample space) and each event BnBn​ is measurable, then for any event A of the same sample space:

$$P(A) = \sum_{n} P(A \cup B_n) = \sum_n P(A | B_n)P(B_n)$$

Here, for any nn for which $P(B_n)=0$ these terms are simply omitted from the summation.

### Continuous Case

The law of total probability extends to the case of conditioning on events generated by continuous random variables:

$$P(A) = \int_{- \infty} P(A | X = x)d F_X(x)$$

If X admits a density function $f_X​,$ then the result is:

$$P(A) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty}P(A | X = x) f_X(x) dx$$

## Example

Suppose two factories supply light bulbs to the market. Factory X's bulbs work for over 5000 hours in 99% of cases, whereas factory Y's bulbs work for over 5000 hours in 95% of cases. Applying the law of total probability, the chance that a purchased bulb will work for longer than 5000 hours is 97.4%.

## Connections to Other Topics
[[Probability Spaces]]

- [[Probability Theory]]: The Law of Total Probability is a foundational concept in Probability Theory.
- [[Marginal Probability]]: It relates marginal probabilities to conditional probabilities.
- [[Probability Measure]]: It is based on the concept of probability measures.
- [[Conditional Probability]]: The law can also be stated for conditional probabilities.]]